Update Angular Material Login blog post (#1022)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2020-01-21-angular-material-login.md

image: blog/angular-material-login/angular-material-login.png
type: conversion
changelog:
- 2020-03-30: Updated to use Angular 11 and the Okta Auth JS 4.8.0. You can see the changes in the [example app on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-angular-material-login-example/pull/3). Changes to this article can be viewed in [oktadeveloper/okta-blog#???](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-blog/pull/637).

> - 2022-01-07: Updated to use Angular 13 and the Okta Auth JS 5.9.1, and to handling interactions with OktaAuth library. You can see the changes in the [example app on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-angular-material-login-example/pull/4). Changes to this article can be viewed in [oktadeveloper/okta-blog#1022](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-blog/pull/1022).

Reviewer: The most recent update should be first.
```suggestion
- 2022-01-07: Updated to use Angular 13 and the Okta Auth JS 5.9.1, and to handle interactions with OktaAuth library. You can see the changes in the [example app on GitHub](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-angular-material-login-example/pull/4). Changes to this article can be viewed in [oktadeveloper/okta-blog#1022](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-blog/pull/1022).
```

## Build an Angular Material App with Secure Login

To get started, you will need the Angular command-line tool. I will assume that you have some familiarity with JavaScript and that you have Node installed on your system together with the Node Package Manager `npm`.

Open a terminal and run the following command to verify if you have Angular CLI installed.

```bash
ng version
```

If you see output with Angular CLI version installed, you're good to move on to the next step. Otherwise, you don't already have Angular CLI installed, so install it by running.

```bash
npm install -g @angular/cli
```

Depending on your operating system, you might have to run this using the `sudo` command. This will install the Angular command-line tool on your system. It lets you use the `ng` command to set up and manipulate Angular applications. In order to create an Angular app for the version we want, we'll use `npx` to create a new app. To create a new application navigate to a directory of your choice and run the following.

```bash
npx @angular/cli@13 new material-tic-tac-toe
```

> You will be asked two questions. Answer **Yes** to the first question. This will set up the router in your application. The router is responsible for letting the user navigate between different parts of the app and updating the browser's URL without actually reloading the page. For the third question, accept the default choice **CSS**. This application will use simple CSS stylesheets, but you can see how easy it is to switch to a different stylesheet technology with Angular.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will be asked two questions. Answer **Yes** to the first question. This will set up the router in your application. The router is responsible for letting the user navigate between different parts of the app and updating the browser's URL without actually reloading the page. For the second question, accept the default choice **CSS**. This application will use simple CSS stylesheets, but you can see how easy it is to switch to a different stylesheet technology with Angular.
```

{% img blog/angular-material-login/angular-style-options.png alt:"Angular stylesheet options" width:"700" %}{: .center-image }

Once the wizard has completed you should see a new folder called `material-tic-tac-toe`. Navigate into the folder and install some packages you will need for the application by running the command below.

```bash
npm install -E @angular/flex-layout@13.0.0-beta.36 tic-tac-toe-minimax@1.0.8
```

`@angular/flex-layout` provides a CSS layout system supporting both FlexBox and CSS Grid using Angular directives. It is independent of the Material components but is often used together with it. And, `tic-tac-toe-minimax` is a ready-to-go tic-tac-toe game with a computer player.

Now you'll add Angular Material library using their schematic that automatically adds the dependencies, sets the theme, imports Material icons and a font, and adds some basic styles. Run the command below.

```bash
ng add @angular/material@13
```

> You'll be asked some questions. First, affirm you want to install the library, then select "Deep Purple/Amber" to apply the purple amber theme, then select "No" for typography, finally select "Yes" to add animations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You'll be asked some questions. First, affirm you want to install the library, select "Deep Purple/Amber" to apply the purple amber theme, then select "No" for typography, and finally select "Yes" to add animations.
```
conciseness + final clause is preceded by "and"... (general best practice)

> The `@angular/material` package provides the components of the Material Design and it installs the `@angular/cdk` library, which is a component development kit that is needed for the Material components to work. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `@angular/material` package provides the components of the Material Design and it installs the `@angular/cdk` library, which is a component development kit needed for the Material components to work. 
```
conciseness.

To get started, you will need to install the Angular command-line tool. I will assume that you have some familiarity with JavaScript and that you have Node installed on your system together with the Node Package Manager `npm`. Open a terminal and type the following command.

```bash

> npm install -g @angular/cli

Reviewer: We try to pin version numbers since things often break between major versions.

```

Depending on your operating system, you might have to run this using the `sudo` command. This will install the Angular command-line tool on your system. It lets you use the `ng` command to set up and manipulate Angular applications. In order to create an Angular app for the version we want, we'll use `npx` to create a new app. To create a new application navigate to a directory of your choice and run the following.

```bash

> npx @angular/cli@13 new material-tic-tac-toe

Reviewer: If you use this technique, please delete the former command that installs the Angular CLI globally.

Author: I'll update the former command for installing Angular CLI globally to add the qualification if it's not already globally available, but I think having a version of Angular CLI installed globally is helpful. Prepending npx for the rest of the Angular CLI commands becomes onerous and slows the commands down a lot.

```bash
npm install -E @angular/material@11.2.6 @angular/flex-layout@11.0.0-beta.33 hammerjs@2.0.8 \
  @angular/cdk@11.2.6 tic-tac-toe-minimax@1.0.8
npm install -E @angular/flex-layout@13.0.0-beta.36 tic-tac-toe-minimax@1.0.8
```

The `@angular/material` package provides the components of the Material Design, `@angular/cdk` is a component development kit that is needed for the Material components to work and `hammerjs` is a library that provides smooth animations for the component. `@angular/flex-layout` provides a flexible and responsive grid. It is independent of the Material components but is often used together with it. Finally, `tic-tac-toe-minimax` is a ready-to-go tic-tac-toe game with a computer player.
`@angular/flex-layout` provides a CSS layout system supporting both FlexBox and CSS Grid using Angular directives. It is independent of the Material components but is often used together with it. And, `tic-tac-toe-minimax` is a ready-to-go tic-tac-toe game with a computer player.

> ## Add Angular Material CSS

Reviewer: If remove the keywords (Angular Material) in a header, maybe they should be added to another header?

Author: @mraible The words "Angular Material" are in 5 headers, plus the title. I can find a way to incorporate it if we need more, but I want to double-check you think this is needed since it's in quite a few headers already.

Reviewer: That's probably enough. I typically aim for 2-3 headers with the keywords.

The `@angular/material` package provides the components of the Material Design and it installs the `@angular/cdk` library, which is a component development kit that is needed for the Material components to work. 

## Add Default Application Styles

> The Angular Material schematic sets up quite a bit for us but we have some default application styles to set. Open `src/styles.css` and add the style for the `h1` element below the styles Angular Material adds for us.

Reviewer: I don't know that "for us" is needed at the end.

```
{% endraw %}

> This code contains the main toolbar and menu of the application. Because we used the Flex-Layout directives to set the layout for the elements, there's no extra styles needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code contains the main toolbar and menu of the application. Because we used the Flex-Layout directives to set the layout for the elements, no extra styles are needed.
```
"are" not "is"

> Now, open `src/app/app.component.ts` and modify the component title and add a public `isAuthenticated` property. The contents of the file should look like this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, open `src/app/app.component.ts`, modify the component title, and add a public `isAuthenticated` property. The contents of the file should look like this.
```
avoid double"and", add serial comma

```bash
npm install -E @okta/okta-auth-js@5.9.1
```

We'll add the configured `OktaAuth` library as a provider in Angular Dependency Injection system. Open `src/app/app.module.ts`. Add `import { OktaAuth } from '@okta/okta-auth-js';` to the file imports list at the top of the file.

Next you'll add it to the `providers` array in the `@NgModule` configuration like the following code snippet.

```ts
@NgModule({
  declarations: [
    // ... component declarations. Leave as is
  ],
  imports: [
    // ... imports array. Leave as is
  ],
  providers: [
    {
      provide: OktaAuth,
      useValue: new OktaAuth({
        issuer: 'https://{YourOktaDomain}/oauth2/default',
        clientId: '{ClientId}',
      })
    }
  ],
  bootstrap: [AppComponent]
})
export class AppModule {
}
```

> The `OktaAuth` object encapsulates the authentication, session management, and communication with the Okta servers. The `OktaAuth` constructor takes several options. The options provided here are the `issuer` and the `clientId`. In these options, you will have to replace `{YourOktaDomain}` with your Okta domain. The `{ClientId}` needs to be replaced with the client ID you obtained when you registered your application with Okta.

Reviewer: We typically say lowercase the first letter: `yourOktaDomain` and `clientId`, but it doesn't matter as long as you're consistent in the post.

Author: This is pre-existing, but I changed all instances to camel case

> You will be implementing a login form as part of your application. Before continuing, a few warnings. If you decide to run a production environment in which you host your own login form, make sure that you are using the secure HTTPS protocol, and you are hosting your site with a valid SSL certificate. Also, make sure to never store the login data in a session variable or the browser's storage. If you fail to take the necessary security precautions, your site may be vulnerable to attacks. As mentioned above, you will not be using any of the Angular-specific Okta libraries. Instead, install the `okta-auth-js` package by opening the terminal in the project's root folder and typing the following command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will be implementing a login form as part of your application. Before continuing, a few warnings. If you decide to run a production environment in which you host your own login form, make sure you use the secure HTTPS protocol and host your site with a valid SSL certificate. Also, make sure to never store the login data in a session variable or the browser's storage. If you fail to take the necessary security precautions, your site may be vulnerable to attacks. As mentioned above, you will not be using any of the Angular-specific Okta libraries. Instead, install the `okta-auth-js` package by opening the terminal in the project's root folder and typing the following command.
```
conciseness

    return this._authSub$.asObservable();
  }

  constructor(private _router: Router, private _authClient: OktaAuth) {
    this._authClient.session.exists().then(exists => this._authSub$.next(exists));
  }

  public ngOnDestroy(): void {
    this._authSub$.next(false);
    this._authSub$.complete();
  }

  public login(username: string, password: string): Observable<void> {
    return from(this._authClient.signInWithCredentials({username, password})).pipe(
      map((t: AuthTransaction) => this.handleSignInResponse(t))
    );
  }

  public logout(redirect: string): Observable<void> {
    return from(this._authClient.signOut()).pipe(
      tap( _ => (this._authSub$.next(false), this._router.navigate([redirect]))),
      catchError(err => {
        console.error(err);
        throw new Error('Unable to sign out');
      })
    )
  }

  private handleSignInResponse(transaction: AuthTransaction): void {
    if (transaction.status !== 'SUCCESS') {
      throw new Error(`We cannot handle the ${transaction.status} status`);
    }

    this._authSub$.next(true)
    this._authClient.session.setCookieAndRedirect(transaction.sessionToken);
  }
}
```

> The `AuthService` has a reference to the injected `OktaAuth` object which we use to interact with the Okta libraries. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `AuthService` has a reference to the injected `OktaAuth` object, which we use to interact with the Okta libraries. 
```
comma precedes "which"

> The `isAuthenticated$` property is the observable stream of a behavior subject that reflects whether the user is logged in or not. The pattern of keeping the behavior subject private and exposing only the observable is a best practice to keep other code paths from manipulating the emissions. The `AuthService` also defines two public methods. The `login()` method sends a sign-in request to the Okta server. On success, the user is authenticated and a session is established. The `logout()` method will sign out the user and redirect them to a specified route. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `isAuthenticated$` property is the observable stream of a behavior subject that reflects whether the user is logged in or not. The pattern of keeping the behavior subject private, exposing only the observable, is a best practice to keep other code paths from manipulating the emissions. The `AuthService` also defines two public methods. The `login()` method sends a sign-in request to the Okta server. On success, the user is authenticated and a session is established. The `logout()` method will sign out the user and redirect them to a specified route. 
```
commas for readability.

```ts
import { LoginComponent } from './login/login.component';
import { AuthGuard } from './auth.guard';
```

Now, change the `routes` array to look like the following.

```ts
const routes: Routes = [
  {
    path: 'game',
    component: GameComponent,
    canActivate: [ AuthGuard ]
  },
  {
    path: 'login',
    component: LoginComponent
  },
  {
    path: '',
    component: HomeComponent
  }
];
```

Well done, that's it. The application is complete!

When you run the `ng serve` command and navigate to `http://localhost:4200` you should now be able to log in and out of the application. The login form uses Material Design and should look something like the image below.

{% img blog/angular-material-login/finished-product.png alt:"Finished product" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

### Make Your App More Secure

> One thing you might notice is that we only watch for sign in and sign out actions to update the authenticated state. This works for our case, but you might not want to allow users whose sessions timed out to continue playing tic-tac-toe. To make your app more secure, you need to watch for sessions timing out. There's several ways to do this, but some popular ones include subscribing to `Router` events and checking, or if your app makes calls to a back-end, redirect the user to the login page when the HTTP call returns a 401 response code. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that we only watch for sign-in and sign-out actions to update the authenticated state. This works for our case, but you might not want to allow users whose sessions have timed out to continue playing tic-tac-toe. To make your app more secure, you need to watch for sessions timing out. There are several ways to do this, but some popular ones include subscribing to `Router` events and checking. Or, if your app makes calls to a back-end, redirect the user to the login page when the HTTP call returns a 401 response code. 
```
-conciseness in the opening sentence, added hyphens to sign-in/sign-out since they are modifying "actions"
-verb tense tweak in 2nd sentence
-breaking a complex sentence into 2 for readability

### Make Angular Tests Pass With Angular Material

> You generated a lot of code in this tutorial. When you created components, tests were created for those components as well. The tests merely verify the components render. If you run `ng test`, most of them will fail because the tests don't have the imports for the components you added and a provider for the `OktaAuth` object. If you'd like to see what it takes to make all the tests pass, see [this commit to add the Angular Material library imports](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-angular-material-login-example/commit/20e899d0ba4f8074681548e268337bd13153f140), and [this commit to provide a fake OktaAuth object](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-angular-material-login-example/commit/e06c1cc20e381b3a72f3c5597dc38dcd7095b82b).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You generated a lot of code in this tutorial. When you created components, tests were created for those components as well. The tests merely verify that the components render. If you run `ng test`, most of them will fail because the tests have neither the imports for the components you added nor a provider for the `OktaAuth` object. If you'd like to see what it takes to make all the tests pass, look at [this commit to add the Angular Material library imports](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/okta-angular-material-login-example/commit/20e899d0ba4f8074681548e268337bd13153f140), and [this commit to provide a fake OktaAuth object](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-angular-material-login-example/commit/e06c1cc20e381b3a72f3c5597dc38dcd7095b82b).
```

  {
    path: 'game',
    component: GameComponent,
    canActivate: [ AuthGuard ]
  },
];
```

Well done, that's it. The application is complete!

When you run the `ng serve` command and navigate to `http://localhost:4200` you should now be able to log in and out of the application. The login form uses Material Design and should look something like the image below.

{% img blog/angular-material-login/finished-product.png alt:"Finished product" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

### Make Your App More Secure

> One thing you might notice is that we only watch for sign in and sign out actions to update the authenticated state. This works for our case, but you might not want to allow users whose sessions timed out to continue playing tic-tac-toe. To make your app more secure, you need to watch for sessions timing out. There's several ways to do this, but some popular ones include subscribing to `Router` events and checking, or if your app makes calls to a back-end, redirect the user to the login page when the HTTP call returns a 401 response code. 

Reviewer: Good tip!
